---
title: "My First Game: Design Considerations"
date:
---

Here I'll begin talking about the sort of game I'm imagining, where I think is the best place to start and what resources I think I'll need to get started.

Part of the core gameplay is a topdown roguelike, very similar to CDDA.

I want world generation similar to Dwarf Fortress - hills and verticality. Procedural storytelling would also be dope!

Another aspect is space flight between worlds, similar to Asteroids, Space War or Endless Sky. I want to be able to navigate between planets and sit in orbit around them. To achieve this, I'm thinking of a 2.5D approach where of course you can just navigate into a circular orbit on the same plane as the planet, but you could also end up orbiting "above" and "beneath" the planet. This would render your ship relative to a 3D orbit but only really needs to account for what layer you are on relative to the planet - above or below. It's my thinking that this will be a more satisfactory experience than being able to crash into a planet. Though, speaking of...

I want gas giants - these are notably absent from _No Man's Sky_ for example. If your ships hull can withstand the pressure, I don't see why you shouldn't be able to sink into a gas giant's atmosphere. **It's a bad idea,** but one I think should be allowed.

I also want it to be possible to explore your ship's interior (not dissimilar to how landing/walking on worlds will work). And I would love for players to be able to customise this space, hire crew and see NPC crew/passengers going about their days. You should be able to deck out a passenger cruiser, a large freighter, a fighter, a carrier (carrying smaller spacecraft) - whatever you like - and you should be able to explore all of these ships from top to bottom with a sense that the spaces have utility.

I'm also imagining an NPC needs system, meaning your ship must be able to provide food, water, recreational spaces etc. if you're flying with crew or passengers.

So where to start?

I feel as though Asteroids-like space flight is the easiest place to start, with ship interiors and planetary landings to be added later... but it's a bit dull, a bit been done, a bit... not the fastest path to a unique experience.

Alternatively, we could start with ship (space station) interiors, and initially work on the NPC needs system. This to me seems like the fastest way to get to a game that's actually interesting and a little bit unique... but it's a lot of work and it's not fully in the spirit of what I'm imagining.

Other than that, there's planetary exploration. This alone wouldn't fit the bill for what I have in mind, but doing world gen first could be a good step if I were focusing on a different, smaller game as a stepping stone to this one.

To my mind right now, I think the order to tackle these features might be:

1. Space station management
2. Ship interiors and interstellar navigation
3. Planetary landings

In that order, this is a uniqe and interesting game experience from very early on and it just gets better from there.

In fact... why are we thinking about space station management? Doesn't it make more sense to be managing a ship? Even if travel is limited to a text menu initially.
