---
title: Choosing a Game Engine
date: 2023-09-21T18:59:26Z
---

So, I wanna make a game. I've been thinking about it for a while. For a long while, actually. And I know it's going to be difficult; I know my ambitions are likely to be dashed as I realise the full scope of actually making something... but I'm prepared to roll with the punches. I'm prepared to simplify as much as I need to. And how hard can it be to make like a simple little roguelike, really? _Famous... last... words..._

Anyway, before we get started we need to pick a game engine. Actually no, we don't _need_ to but sod doing that part myself! Some people make the choice to roll their own engines, but those people are a lot cleverer than I am... or a lot crazier. No, if you're brand new to game development you would soon be surprised how much an engine does for you. For example, the window your game runs in - be it a fullscreen window or a window of specific dimensions; if you're rolling your own engine, you have to include code to handle that for you. Since we're going to be using an off-the-shelf solution, windowing (the surprising thing you didn't know needed doing) will be handled for us... or will be handled by a plugin made by someone else that just works with the engine of our choice.

Yes, plugins! Plugins and packages. These are a big consideration for me as well as I begin this journey. You don't need to and you shouldn't be reinventing the wheel with every game you make. If something's been done before, it's likely there's an open source and freely licensed package out there that can handle it for us satisfactorily. For classic roguelikes, there are in fact a bunch of packages that include things like a viewshed, enemy AI and logic for generating and showing your game world. I don't know yet which, if any, of these I'll be using, but I know where to look. If and when I decide my game needs X feature, I'll probably first look to see if anybody has already implemented said feature and published it as a plugin. If it's fit for my purposes, I'll probably use it. If it's not, I'll no doubt use it as inspiration in writing my own code.

And yeah, code. Of course code. While a lot of engines do have incredible visual editors, and many allow you to create games without writing so much as a single line of code, eventually if you want to do something novel you're likely going to need to whip open a code editor and get writing. I don't want to shy away from that, nor do I want to use an engine that restricts my use of code too much. With that in mind, let's run through a few game engines I've given a little consideration to and I will explain why I've chosen _Bevy_.

## Macromedia Flash or _Ah, the good old days..._

This actually isn't my first foray into game development. A long, long time ago now, I tried my hand at making some simple games in Flash, at the time owned by Macromedia. How well did that go? Not particularly. I remember trying to make a simple sidescrolling adventure game where you played as a pirate fighting other pirates. Never quite got the enemy spawning to work, so I wound up with a situation where I could either spawn enemies that wouldn't move or I could move enemies that wouldn't spawn. Don't ask me how that worked; I abandoned the project, Macromedia were purchased by Adobe and Flash was eventually purged from the internet for security. But Flash's programming language, ActionScript, was a lot like a language I now use a lot day to day...

## Phaser or _You can write games in JavaScript?_

JavaScript! _The_ language of the frontend web. I've dabbled in it for years as a web developer, only recently using it more extensively as Node applications have come into fashion. So I know the language and I know it pretty well, but is it right for game development? I mean... yeah, of course. Phaser is great, and if I...

1. wanted to publish my game on the web and only on the web
2. didn't also want to take this opportunity to learn another language

...I would be very happy to muddle my way through using Phaser. The resulting game could never be as sophisticated as some of the other options will allow, but Phaser is very fit for making simple 2D games that you can play in the browser. Actually, I think it may support 3D too - I've done 3D work in JavaScript in the past using the Three.js library; I can't see why it wouldn't be possible to make a 3D game in Phaser.

Unfortunately, I think Phaser and the browser probably run up against limitations earlier than some of my other options and, as I've said, I'd like to learn a new programming language. So... moving on!

## GameMaker or _Making games is easy!_

While we're on the subject of limitations, I believe GameMaker is limited by design... Maybe I'm wrong. I'm looking at their website right now and two games I recognise were made with it: _Forager_ and _Zero Sievert_. Definitely don't count this game engine out! It's got a lot of potential.

I believe GameMaker is supposed to be very beginner friendly, with a greater emphasis on visual programming than other engines on this list. But it does let you write code too... in GameMaker Programming Language, the software's own proprietary programming language. That's a little off-putting for me, as I'd like to learn a language that has value to me when I transfer to using it for other work.

GameMaker's emphasis seems to be on simplicity, so it's very beginner friendly but people might run into difficulties as they try to take their projects to the next level. I dunno, maybe I'll circle back around to this and give it a try one day.

## Unity and Unreal or _Heavy is the head that wears the crown_

Two other very popular options here, and if you're reading this you've no doubt already heard of both. Unity and Unreal are always competing for the top spot in the openly available game engine space. While I think Unreal is more powerful, many prefer Unity because it's open source. Though... open source doesn't mean it's absolutely free, and while both can be used for free these each have licensing terms and take a cut from developers eventually.

I'm not going to get into the recent drama concerning Unity. I'd actually ruled these two out of contention before that. They both offer way more than I need right now, and I'd much rather a simpler and more open licensing structure. Which is why I started looking at...

## Godot or _Game engines should be free!_

Ah, Godot. Very, very strong contender! Not as powerful as Unity or Unreal, but a very capable game engine and absolutely free to use. It's open source, MIT licensed, and it is capable of both 2D and 3D games (though 3D support is a little limited just yet). There are also a ton of amazing resources for beginners. I mentioned up top that I've decided to use Bevy instead, but Godot is sitting happily in second place. Definitely my fallback if I find I'm struggling to use Bevy.

## Bevy or _Wait, what? You want it more complicated?_

Bevy lacks a lot. The software is young, doesn't include much by default, doesn't even have a GUI or visual editor. If you're a beginner who is interested in game development, particularly if you're interested in game dev as a career... you probably won't pick this and you probably shouldn't. The lack of a visual editor means I'll be spending most of my time looking at code instead of visual nodes and scenes. And that code will be written in Rust, which I like the flavour of quite a bit. Rust is also used in a bunch of other contexts and applications, so it's a transferrable skill.

_But Thom, Godot supports Rust too..._

You're right, or at least I think you're right which is why I wrote it. I think I'm drawn to Bevy because it's Rust by default, which I prefer to C# and C++ just because I find Rust easier to read. Coming from a software development background where I spend most of my time in code editors anyway, I just think I'll have a clearer sense of my project's dependencies and what each component does this way.

So it's a game engine without the bells and whistles, but by the time I need to add bells and/or whistles to my game, I'll know where they're coming from and where they live in my project.

As I said above, maybe I end up struggling to make progress in Bevy. Maybe I start to think I could really do with a visual environment that isn't provided via an unofficial plugin. And maybe I end up looking at Godot or GameMaker instead, but I think Bevy and Rust is where I'm going to have the most fun. At the end of the day, it has to be fun otherwise I'm gonna end up abandoning the project.

So hey, welcome to my game dev blog. Let's start making a game in Bevy!
