---
title: "The Bevy Approach: Assets"
date: 2023-09-21T23:36:21Z
---

So... Bevy. Why have I chosen it? If you're asking that, perhaps you didn't read [my previous article](/blog/choosing-a-game-engine). Or maybe you did and you're still wondering because it's a bloody mad choice. It lacks so many of the core features you'd expect from a general purpose game engine in 2023. Ah, but that's where you're... 100% correct. But what Bevy does have is Rust, which has crates.

Crates are Rust's approach to package management managed and bundled together by [Cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/index.html), the Rust package manager. Bevy is just like any other crate in this respect. To include it in a Rust project, you simply add it as a dependency to a `Cargo.toml` file in the root of your project:

```toml
[dependencies]
bevy = "0.11"
```

This approach isn't dissimilar to using NPM in JavaScript and TypeScript projects or to using Bundler in Ruby projects, each of which I'm already very comfortable with. _I'm uncertain if any other popular game engines come with a package manager; asset libraries yes, but I don't know if they have as clear an approach to dependency management as this._

What this means in practical terms is that any time I need a new feature in my game, I should be able to first look to the [crates package registry](https://crates.io/) and see if there isn't already a solution out there providing what I need. For example my game, like many out there, needs a tilemap. Engines like Godot and Unity already have built-in support for this, but in my case I can look for tilemaps in the crates registry and find something like... [bevy_ecs_tilemap](https://crates.io/crates/bevy_ecs_tilemap) to provide support for this feature.

Does this still sound like quite a mad plan? Probably. My point is that Bevy in a sense isn't really lacking these features, it just includes them differently. We build what we need from the component parts as we go.

_So, Bevy lacks an editor? So what! We can add a crate to integrate one. The Unofficial Bevy Cheatbook lists two fantastic [Bevy editor crate](https://bevy-cheatbook.github.io/setup/bevy-tools.html) options. Try one, the other, or both!_

---

By the way, for visual tilemap creation and editing, the aforementioned `bevy_ecs_tilemap` crate supports tilemaps created in the [Tiled](https://www.mapeditor.org/) map editor or the level designer toolkit - [LDtk](https://ldtk.io/), so we aren't exactly lacking for visual editor options.

---

I very much like this compartmentalised, separation of responsibility sort of approach. Do I worry that it will be harder to mesh the constituent parts together because they aren't created and managed by a central entity? Absolutely. But I like that at every step along the way, I ought to know which dependency or which bit of code is responsible for which feature. It seems to me this would be a lot less clear in Unity, where those features are already baked in and one just... makes use of them as needed.

When we find we need AI for our non-player characters, maybe we install and figure out how to use [big-brain](https://crates.io/crates/big-brain).

If we find ourselves in need of a physics engine, perhaps [Rapier](https://rapier.rs/) meets our needs.

There is a _not comprehensive_ list of other assets available on the official Bevy site: <https://bevyengine.org/assets/>

Maybe I'm crazy... _Scratch that, I probably am crazy._ But... I like this very clear, very compartmentalised approach to developing software. Certainly I will run into challenges where a feature I need either hasn't been worked on already and published as a crate or has been but the implementation isn't fit for my purposes. In those instances, I might end up writing more code than I would have had to in Godot, but I don't mind that. I get, I think, a lot more clarity and a much more easily maintained source repository in the trade.

This approach certainly isn't for everyone, but I think it's right for me.

Next post, I'll let you in on what I'm thinking of making...
